# The Opinionated Alpinist

Thanks for checking my book out. I'm honored and will do my very best to keep you
in mind. I do tend to go off on tangents, and for that I must apologize
already. Hopefully the editing process helped cut that s#$t down.

I'm fond of references to *The Lord of the Rings.* If you didn't read those
books then I'm sorry. Sorry for **you, ha!** No, I know they aren't everyone's
cup of tea. However, in my experience of the mountains, those books are
threaded through and are now inseparable, kind of like that new metamorphic
rock we are getting with bits of plastic embedded. When these references crop
up, know that I'm trying to get through them quickly and am at least aware that
I go too far.

I'm both a serious alpinist and a regular guy whose fitness level was never
much to brag about. As I look back, I think the key to success for me was
risking more. If you've seen the movie *Gattaca,* when Ethan Hawke's character
explains why he beat his brother swimming, it's because he didn't hold anything
back for the return journey. In my secret heart, I did the same, knowing it was
the price of playing *today* and not waiting for some future year when I would
be as fit as I imagined I should be.

Some people just want to live and not examine every little thing. Dear Reader,
I'm sorry to say, I'm not one of those people! At least not any more. I think
little things matter, in that they provide clues to the largest things. Again,
the editing process should help us both out here!

I use curse words rather a lot, but always in a particular way. I want to turn
up the volume on something I'm saying and indicate that I really, really feel
the truth of it. So, weirdly, curse words only occur in a positive context.
Since I'm pretty positive about a great many things, there is a lot of cursing!

You'll get a lot of philosophy in this book, because I see the world as full of
meaning to be discovered. If you actually know something about philosophy,
you'll probably be frustrated with me. It's not that I value my opinion so much
more than the learned opinion of so many wise people who came before, it's only
that I am unwilling to take the time to trace my thoughts on living to their
first emergence. I'm the kind of sample artist, whose only honest defense when
caught sampling all kinds of things without attribution says that she found it
more important to be Sound than to place Sound in it's proper place. There
might well be a special circle of hell awaiting me for that, but I just don't
have time.

What works for me might be terrible for you, and you should give it a wide
berth. However, I thought about this stuff a lot, and if your disagreement is
sharp and intense, I urge you to set the book aside and linger for some days on
that sore point. It doesn't matter to me where you end up, so long as you
process that knot in your muscles.

# Chapter One - Fire

In the European Alps, on a multi-pitch rock climb there is usually a "route
book" some ways up the route. It's usually found in a little niche somewhere
after the crux, such that signing it means yeah, you've done the route even if
you beetle off on some escape ledge above that point.

*Ed: this thought trails off*

I use the term fire to mean the will (*Sturm und Drang!*). The will grows in
power by feeding it with products of the imagination. The imagination is fed
with images, ideas, conversations...all the scraps of life. You end up with a
vision that slowly evolves, growing in power day by day.

In my case, the vision was one of Mastery. I saw myself on the edge of a
beautiful, complex and dangerous alpine landscape. Icefalls tumbled through
grey cliffs into dark and silent forests. Improbable ledge systems led,
Cahadhras-like, around corners, and appeared again, now mist-beshrouded on a
far, snow-speckled battlement. I felt within me the level-headed skill to
traverse all this terrain quickly and silently. The vision included a component
of growth over time, in which I'd have been tested, sometimes failing, but
always getting up again wiser, and with an essential purity or naivete intact.
This was important, because I really disliked what I saw in some older climbers
-- a weariness that wasn't balanced by laughter. It seemed to me that if you
weren't careful with your life in the mountains, you'd end up an old stone,
durable but worn down and no longer capable of reflecting the "beautiful
disaster" of such incredible landscapes.

"You're a *romantic*, Michael!" a friend said to me once, with the air of having found some secret.

"Yes. By God you're right! Put me on the cupboard next to all the unfashionable
men and women of the mountains who got lost in their appreciation of those
darkling towers and silent waiting crevasses...who were judged by the world as
impractical. About whom the world uttered a 'told ya so!' when they disappeared
one day, presumed dead."

If I had actually said that I'd be fricking huge, with like, groupies or
something, but really I just felt vaguely bad like I'd made a mistake. I've
always felt like the world regards me as a show-off because I insist on
describing and enthusing about the things I see and occasionally do. I always
know that where the world is concerned, less back-talk from me is usually whats
wanted. However, screw that! I gush, I yell out what I saw, I sing my song, and
now the older me comes to the rescue of the younger and says that my freak flag
is not all bad, and even slightly good.

So...I had a vision, fired and refined in my imagination. But were it to remain
there I wouldn't have anything to say. I'd just be reporting a dream. A channel
has to open up into action, and this is the Will. This is Fire.

A problem today with talking about the Will and Fire and such things is that
you end up conjuring up a Ubermensch image, and man, we (rightly) hate such
people, because we are deeply familiar with the dark side. Conceit, withering
scorn, ultimate destruction. So let me go deeper.

The truth is, the greatest acts of will are made in the minds and bodies of the
vulnerable. Someone who has few gifts, is unnoticed, but who is fired by a
vision has the chance to redeem the world. Why so? Because in their
transformation, they combine empathy for what they were with excitement about
where they are going. When balance is kept on the journey, they combine
strength with gentleness for the weak. This is the meaning of phrases that show
up in places like the Lord of the Rings, where a healer woman says about
Aragorn that the hands of the King will be the hands of a Healer as well.

Here, I'm saying that it's important to find a way to build Fire in some aspect
of your life. If you were always talented as a climber, if you always found the
trips easy, were never riddled with fear at the cruxes...if you never felt
small and alone and abandoned...then you had better do **something else**. Your
path lies elsewhere, and the best life will come after that day you stumble
with horror upon a situation that is finally larger than you. Send us a
postcard!

So I've made a big deal about this "Will" thing, how do you build it? Just give
me the TL;DR and hush up!

Okay, what you do is prove things to yourself. If you read that Hermann Buhl
carried snowballs around pre-war Innsbruck in order to build up the capillary
network in his hands, and if that inspires you...then find some damn snowballs
and do it. Let people see you doing it, and laugh along with them.

If your trip requires walking up through the jungle at 2 in the morning in
order to reach the summit on time, then do it. And do it alone, proving that
your will is stronger than any warm sleeping bag.

If you are scared of falling on a sport climb, then dedicate the day to falling
over and over exactly at the place that scares you the most (this only works on
sport climbs, not alpine stuff!).

If you don't trust your gear placements, then take some aiders and gear to an
easy crag and ignore all your favorite routes...only stand in etriers on your
gear for 8 full hours, one piece after another after another. Feel the "flavor"
of denying yourself the company of friends, dogs and smiles.

Will is a muscle that grows stronger through the testing. And by passing a
test, you set another part of yourself to dreaming further.

Hmpf, I guess this is the most important thing. The rest of this book is
rubbish! Wasted pixels, all up in yer screenz!

